CEDS documentation for SLCF (#169)
PCMDI/input4MIPs_CVs: docs/dataset-overviews/anthropogenic-slcf-co2-emissions.md

<!--- These values are used by `fill-out-auto-generated-sections.py` -->
<!--- forcing="Anthropogenic short-lived climate forcer (SLCF) and CO<sub>2</sub> emissions" -->
<!--- source_id_stub="CEDS-CMIP" -->
# Anthropogenic short-lived climate forcer (SLCF) and CO<sub>2</sub> emissions

## Key contacts

- Names: Rachel Hoesly, Steve Smith
- Emails: rachel.hoesly@pnnl.gov; ssmith@pnnl.gov

## Summary

> CEDS v_2024_10_21 and CEDS v_2024_11_25 make up the CMIP6Plus anthropogenic short-lived climate forcer and CO<sub>2</sub> emissions data set including: 
> 
> - Bulk emissions for all species except NMVOC's and supplementary solid biofuel emissions files from v_2024_11_25
> - Air emissions for all species, NMVOC bulk emissions, and supplementary speciated VOCs from v_2024_10_21
> 
> These data releases are documented [here](https://zenodo.org/records/13952845) and [here](https://zenodo.org/records/14145000).
> 
> This data is derived from CEDS v_2024_07_08 aggregate emissions release. CEDS v_2024_07_08 aggregate data by country and sector is also available in units of kilo-tonne (kt) per year which can be found [here](https://zenodo.org/records/12803197).
> 
> Note that country totals in these summary files do not include international shipping or aircraft emissions, which are reported under the "global" iso. 
> 
> Emissions data are provided for SO<sub>2</sub>, NOx, BC, OC, NH<sub>3</sub>, NMVOC,  CO, CO<sub>2</sub> from 1750 - 2022.
> Emissions data for CH<sub>4</sub> and N<sub>2</sub>O are provided from 1970 - 2022.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CEDS data is available for testing (see the section below).
Emissions data are provided for SO<sub>2</sub>, NOx, BC, OC, NH<sub>3</sub>, NMVOC,  CO, CO<sub>2</sub> from 1750 - 2022.
Emissions data for CH<sub>4</sub> and N<sub>2</sub>O are provided from 1970 - 2022.

When handling this data, some extra care must be taken given that CEDS' testing data is published under multiple source IDs. In addition, solid biofuel emissions and speciated NMVOCs have the suffix "-supplemental" added to their source ID to avoid inadvertent double counting.

- Bulk emissions for all species except NMVOC's and supplementary solid biofuel emissions files are identified by the source ID "CEDS-CMIP-2024-11-25" (or "CEDS-CMIP-2024-11-25-supplemental" for the solid biofuel emissions)
- Air emissions for all species, NMVOC bulk emissions, and supplementary speciated VOCs are identified by the source ID "CEDS-CMIP-2024-10-21" (or "CEDS-CMIP-2024-10-21-supplemental" for the speciated VOCs)

The underlying data releases are documented [here](https://zenodo.org/records/13952845) and [here](https://zenodo.org/records/14145000).

This data is derived from CEDS' v_2024_07_08 aggregate emissions release. Aggregate data by country and sector for this release is also available in units of kilo-tonne (kt) per year and can be found [here](https://zenodo.org/records/12803197). Note that country totals in these summary files do not include international shipping or aircraft emissions, which are reported under the "global" iso. 

```

I would suggest doing this to avoid confusion and be clearer about what is for testing and what isn't. In the input4MIPs universe, we try and rely on source IDs so would suggest talking about those rather than versions as much as possible.

If you have any feedback, please add it to the [relevant GitHub discussion](https://github.com/PCMDI/input4MIPs_CVs/discussions).

#### CMIP7 AR7 fast track

No data available for this phase yet.

This data will be for the CMIP7 AR7 fast track.
All data sets for use in the fast track will be published with a `mip_era` metadata value of 'CMIP7'.
This metadata value will appear both in the file's global metadata as well as its metadata on ESGF.

Further details will follow in early 2025.

#### CMIP7

No data available for this phase yet.

This data will be for CMIP7.
All data sets for use in CMIP7 will be published with a `mip_era` metadata value of 'CMIP7'.
This metadata value will appear both in the file's global metadata as well as its metadata on ESGF.

Further details will follow after the fast track is underway
(including details about how updates to this data will be handled over the lifetime of CMIP7).

<!--- end-cmip7-phases-source-ids -->

## Navigating the data

### Recommendation for pre-industrial control

Repeat the 1850 values.

### Grids and frequencies provided

> CEDS emissions are provided at monthly resolution, on a 0.5 degree grid, with 50-years per data file as per ESGF formatting conventions. (A 0.1° grid for recent decades is also available.) Emissions are relatively smooth over the early portion of this time period, but annual data is supplied for consistency across the dataset. The files are in netcdf v4 (HDFv5) format with CF-compliant metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CEDS emissions are provided at monthly resolution, on a 0.5 degree grid, with 50-years per data file. (A 0.1° grid for recent decades is also available.) Emissions are relatively smooth over the early portion of this time period, but annual data is supplied for consistency across the dataset. The files are in netcdf v4 (HDFv5) format with CF-compliant and ESGF-compliant metadata.

```

The 50-year per file thing isn't a standard, minor tweak.

Gridded aircraft emissions are also supplied in a separate file with 25 vertical layers (using the CMIP5 historical emissions Lamarque et al. 2010, as drawn from Lee et al., as a template). Note that aircraft emissions are zero in early years, but files are provided for all years consistency.

> The gridded emissions incorporate a monthly seasonal cycle by sector drawing largely from the ECLIPSE project, Carbon Tracker, and EDGAR.

Reviewer: Do you want to add any links for these projects?

Author: links added

> VOC speciation is provided at the 23 species resolution used in HTAP and RETRO. 

Reviewer: As above, links to the projects or not worth it?

Author: link added

### Variables provided

> Subsequent CEDS data releases since August 2016 are in a format with data in one variable, with sectors included as a dimension. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Subsequent CEDS data releases since August 2016 are in a format of one variable per data file, with the sectors included as a dimension of the variable's data. 

```

The sectors in the netCDF files (other than aviation) are:

> Sector	Descriptions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sector	Description

```

- 0: AGR	Non-combustion agricultural sector
- 1: ENE	Energy transformation and extraction
- 2: IND	Industrial combustion and processes
- 3: TRA	Surface Transportation (Road, Rail, Other)
- 4: RCO	Residential, commercial, and other
- 5: SLV	Solvents
- 6: WST	Waste disposal and handling
- 7: SHP	International shipping (including VOCs from oil tanker loading/leakage)

Within the netCDF files the sector ids are:
sector:ids = "0: Agriculture; 1: Energy; 2: Industrial; 3: Transportation; 4: Residential, Commercial, Other; 5: Solvents production and application; 6: Waste; 7: International Shipping" ;

### Supplementary Data

> For use in setting aerosol size distribution and additional speciation (if desired), an auxiliary dataset emissions providing emissions from solid biomass combustion is also provided. Note that these are a subset of emissions in the main files. These data, therefore, should NOT be added to the emissions in the main files. (Note that no data files for CO2 emissions from solid biomass are released, as CO2 emissions from CEDS are from fossil fuels only.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For use in setting aerosol size distribution and additional speciation (if desired), an auxiliary dataset providing emissions from solid biomass combustion is also provided. Note that these are a subset of emissions in the main files. These data, therefore, should NOT be added to the emissions in the main files. (Note that no data files for CO2 emissions from solid biomass are released, as CO2 emissions from CEDS are from fossil fuels only.)

```

> Supplementary "checksum" .csv text files that provide total global mass for each sector, month, and year are also available as well as global seasonal diagnostic plots can be found [here](https://zenodo.org/records/14145000).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Supplementary checking `.csv` text files that provide total global mass for each sector, month, and year as well as global seasonal diagnostic plots can be found [here](https://zenodo.org/records/14145000).

```

Uncertainties in recent years (most recent 2-3 years) are higher due to delays in reporting data and common revision of data point in recent years (as documented [here](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/aaebc3)). Uncertainties farther back in time are also higher, especially the spatial distribution. However, the importance of anthropogenic emissions compared to natural sources also become less significant in these early years. In between (roughly between 1970 and 5 years before now)
the uncertainties can be smaller.

### Examples of working with the data

See the [CEDS GitHub page](https://github.com/JGCRI/CEDS).
The [emission harmonization team's notebooks](https://github.com/iiasa/emissions_harmonization_historical/)
may also be of interest.

### Differences from CMIP6 or other previous versions

Comparison figures showing CMIP6 vs CMIP6Plus data sets by aggregate region and sector can be found [here](https://github.com/JGCRI/CEDS/blob/master/documentation/Version_comparison_figures_v_2024_07_08_vs_2016_07_16(CMIP6).pdf).

### File formats and naming

The file formats are identical to CMIP6.

#### Emissions Data file name format

> Bulk Gridded emissions: [em_species]-em-anthro_input4MIPs_emissions_CMIP_CEDS-2024-10-21_gn_YYYY01-ZZZZ12.nc

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bulk Gridded emissions: [em_species]-em-anthro_input4MIPs_emissions_CMIP_[source_id]]_gn_YYYY01-ZZZZ12.nc

```

(where YYYY is the starting year contained in this file, and ZZZZ is the ending year)
netCDF variable name: [em_species]_em_anthro

> Gridded aircraft emissions: [em_species]-em-AIR-anthro_input4MIPs_emissions_CMIP_CEDS-2024-10-21_gn_YYYY01-ZZZZ12.nc

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gridded aircraft emissions: [em_species]-em-AIR-anthro_input4MIPs_emissions_CMIP_[source_id]_gn_YYYY01-ZZZZ12.nc

```

netCDF variable name: [em_species]_em_AIR_anthro

#### Supplemental emissions Data file name format

> Gridded biomass emissions: [em_species]-em-SOLID-BIOFUEL-anthro_input4MIPs_emissions_CMIP_CEDS-2024-10-21-supplemental-data_gn_YYYY01-ZZZZ12.nc

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gridded biomass emissions: [em_species]-em-SOLID-BIOFUEL-anthro_input4MIPs_emissions_CMIP_[source_id]_gn_YYYY01-ZZZZ12.nc

```

netCDF variable name: [em_species]_em_SOLID_BIOFUEL_anthro

> VOC speciation grids: VOC01-alcohols-em-speciated-VOC-anthro_input4MIPs_emissions_CMIP_CEDS-2024-10-21-supplemental-data_gn_YYYY01-ZZZZ12.nc

Reviewer: ```suggestion
VOC speciation grids: VOC01-alcohols-em-speciated-VOC-anthro_input4MIPs_emissions_CMIP_[source_id]_gn_YYYY01-ZZZZ12.nc

```

netCDF variable name: VOC01_alcohols_em_speciated_VOC_anthro

> (There is a separate README file with further information on VOC speciation -- see project web site. Note there is a variable naming inconsistency for these file - described in the VOC README)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(There is a separate README file with further information on VOC speciation -- see the CEDS project web site. Note there is a variable naming inconsistency for these file - described in the VOC README)

```
